---
layout: page
category: reference
---

Documentation of the GFX.js library

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
MathJax.Hub.Config({
  tex2jax: {inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']]},
  TeX: { extensions: ["AMSmath.js"] }
});
</script>
<script type="text/javascript" async
  src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS_HTML"></script>

The most recent `GFX.js` is here:
[https://rawgit.com/wolftype/200c/gh-pages/js/gfx_v02.js]()

            <script src = "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/wolftype/200c@gh-pages/js/gfx_v02.js"></script>

The previous `GFX.js` is here:
[https://rawgit.com/wolftype/200c/gh-pages/js/gfx_v01.js]()


### <a name="api">Recent Changes to the API</a>

In `gfx_v02.js` I have renamed member variables of `GFX.Frame` in order to distinguish between:

* Properties of a frame (`.position`, `.orientation`, and `.size`)
* Transformations of those properties (`.translate()`, `.rotate()`, and `.scale()`)

`.scale(sx,sy,sz)` is a function that changes the `.size` property.   
`.rotate(t,x,y,z)` is a function that changes the `.orientation` property.  
`.translate(x,y,z)` is a function that changes the `.position` property.

So if you were changing frame properties directly using:

      frame.rotation = ...
      frame.scale =  ...

instead use

      frame.orientation = ...
      frame.size = ...

## Contents

* [API Changes](#api)
* [HTML File](#file)
* [GFX.App](#app)
* [GFX.Scene](#scene)
* [GFX.Mesh](#mesh)
* [GFX.Frame](#frame)
* [GFX.Matrix](#matrix)
* [GFX.MatrixStack](#stack)
* [GFX.Quaternion](#quaternion)
* [GFX.Vector](#vector)
* [GFX.Shader](#shader)
* [GFX.Buffer](#buffer)

## Introduction

GFX.js is an ASAP (as-simple-as-possible) framework for experimenting with WebGL graphics.

Its goals are to be easy to use, minimally designed, and (hopefully) maintain backward compatibility when (only necessary) features are added.  It is built to assist in introducing students to the modern, programmable OpenGL pipeline.

Keeping the code to under 2000 lines means it can be read (by you!) in full.
Some assumptions were made in order to keep the code simple.

A current limitation is that the [`scene.draw(mesh)`](#scene.draw) method assumes you are only using one shader.  This will likely change, likely by adding a feature which allows meshes to have their own shaders attached to them.

### Pipeline Overview

A [GFX.Mesh](#mesh) has buffers of data (vectors, indices, colors, uv texture coordinates), settings for how to draw these by a [GFX.Scene](#scene), and a [GFX.Frame](#frame) for specifying an object's position, orientation, and size.

A [GFX.Scene](#scene) has a [GFX.Shader](#shader) for processing mesh data, a [GFX.Camera](#camera) used to create view matrix based on the camera's [GFX.Frame](#frame) and a projection matrix based on its field-of-view and the width and height of the screen. A scene also has its own frame, and its own transformation [GFX.MatrixStack](#stack).

A [GFX.Frame](#frame) is composed of a [GFX.Vector](#vector) position, a [GFX.Quaternion](#quaternion) orientation, and another vector representing size.


### <a name="file">The HTML file</a>

Below is a shell of a script for creating a WebGL application using GFX. 

We will have to add code to the `onInit` and `onRender` methods of the `GFX.App`,
as well as a vertex shader and fragment shader.


	{% highlight javascript %}
      <html>
      <script src = "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/wolftype/200c@gh-pages/js/gfx_v02.js"></script>
      
      var app = new GFX.App();

      app.onInit() = function(){
      //initialize GL objects and buffers
      }

      app.onRender() = function(){
      //drawing routines
      }

      <script id = "gfxvert" type="text/glsl">
      //vertex shader code
      </script>

      <script id = "gfxfrag" type="text/glsl">
      //fragment shader code
      </script>
      
      <body onload = "app.start()">
      <canvas id = "gfxcanvas" width = "640" height = "480"></canvas>
      </body>
      </html>
      {% endhighlight %}

### <a name="app"> GFX.App</a>

GFX.App handles initialization of the webGL context, loads the scene's shader from the scripts

#### Methods

* `.onInit()`: Setup GL objects and buffers.
* `.onRender()`: Called repeatedly by the animation loop.
* `.start()`: Begins the program.

#### Members

* `.scene`: A [GFX.Scene](#scene)
* `.canvas`: The html canvas element to which we are rendering.

### <a name="scene"> GFX.Scene </a>

A GFX.Scene manages all the matrix information we need to transform our mesh data as it is sent over to the graphics card (GPU).  It has its own frame of reference for rotating the scene, a camera for a stack of matrices to push, transform, and pop, and a shader to which all these matrices are sent, and which then processes mesh information.

* The [`scene.camera`](#camera) enables you to move your view in 3D space.
* The [`scene.matrix`](#stack) stack enables you to push and pop your transformation matrices, which can be rotated, translated, and scaled.
* The [`scene.frame`](#frame) enables you to translate, rotate, and scale the whole scene.

It also controls the background color

Inside `app.onRender()` we will typically add the following code:


      {% highlight javascript%}
      app.onRender() = function(){
            var scene = this.scene;
            scene.begin();
                scene.draw(/*...myMesh...*/);
            scene.end();
      }
      {% endhighlight%}




#### Methods

* <a name="scene.begin">`.begin()`</a>: Binds the scene's shader, and uploads model, view, and projection matrices to it. Also, it clears the screen and clears the [matrix stack](#stack).
* <a name="scene.draw">`.draw(mesh)`</a>: Draws a [GFX.Mesh](#mesh). See also how the [model](#model) is calculated.  
* <a name="scene.end">`.end()`</a>: Unbinds the scene shader.
* <a name="scene.project">`.project(wc)`</a>: Returns the screen coordinate vector in pixels of world coordinate [GFX.Vector](#vector). 
* <a name="scene.unproject">`.unproject(sc)`</a>: Returns the world coordinates vector of screen coordinate [GFX.Vector](#vector). 


#### Members

* `.width`: The width of the scene in pixels.
* `.height`: The height of the scene in pixels.
* `.color`: The background color (used in `GL.clearColor`).
* `.time`: An incrementing counter.
* `.camera`: A [GFX.Camera](#camera) for use in calculating the View matrix.
* `.shader`: A [GFX.Shader](#shader) defined by you in your [`.html`](#file) document. 
* `.frame`: A [GFX.Frame](#frame) which encodes a global translation-rotation-scale matrix.
* `.matrix`: A [GFX.MatrixStack](#stack) for rotating, translating, and scaling in arbitrary order.

### <a name="stack"> GFX.MatrixStack </a>

[GFX.Scene](#scene) has a `.matrix` member which is a stack (i.e. a list) of matrices that
enable us to compound transformations in interesting ways.  

During [`scene.draw()`](#scene.draw), the last entry of this matrix is used
as one of three matrices to calculate the model which is sent to the vertex shader.

The following code draws a circle of objects by manipulating the `scene.matrix` stack.

      {% highlight javascript %}
      app.onRender(){
            var scene = this.scene;
            scene.begin();
                
                  for (var i =0;i<=100; ++i){
                        var t = i/100;
                        scene.matrix.push();

                              scene.matrix.rotate(2*Math.PI*t,0,0,1);
                              scene.matrix.translate(2,0,0);

                              scene.draw(objA);

                        scene.matrix.pop();
                  }
            scene.end();
      }
      {% endhighlight %}

For 100 iterations, we `push` the matrix stack, making a copy of the last matrix, `rotate` by an every increasing angle around the z axis, and `translate` by a fixed amount along the x axis, then we `pop` (discard) the matrix.

Compare that to the following code, where the `push` and `pop` happen outside the loop:

      {% highlight javascript %}
            app.onRender = function() {
                var scene = this.scene;
                scene.begin();
                    
                      scene.matrix.push();
                      for (var i =0;i<=100; ++i){
                            var t = i/100;
                            scene.matrix.rotate(8*Math.PI/100,0,0,1);
                            scene.matrix.translate(t,0,0);
                            scene.draw(mesh);            
                      }
                      scene.matrix.pop();

                scene.end();
            }
      {% endhighlight %}

For 100 iterations, we `rotate` by a fixed angle around the z axis, and then translate by an ever increasing amount in that new coordinate system.  Then we repeat.  What shape does this make?

#### Methods

* `.push()`: Copies the last entry in the stack and adds it to the stack
* `.set(m)`: Sets the last entry in the stack to be matrix `m`.
* `.translate(x,y,z)`: Multiplies the last entry in the stack by a transformation matrix.
* `.rotate(t,x,y,z)`: Multiplies the last entry in the stack by a rotation matrix.
* `.scale(sx,sy,sz)`: Multiplies the last entry in the stack by a scale matrix.
* `.pop()`: Removes the last entry in the stack.

#### Members

* `.stack`: A list of matrices


### <a name="model">Calculating The Model</a> 

When drawing a Mesh in [`scene.draw()`](#scene.draw), the model transformation sent to the shader is computed as:

$$ A_{model} = A_{sceneFrame} * A_{sceneMatrixStack} * A_{meshFrame} $$

1 - $A_{meshFrame}$: The Mesh Frame's position, orientation, and size, converted into a 
translation-rotation-scale (TRS) matrix (in that order).

2 - $A_{stack}$: The current (i.e. last) entry in the Scene's matrix stack.

3 - $A_{sceneFrame}$: The Scene's own frame, converted into a TRS matrix.

## <a name="mesh">GFX.Mesh</a>

A collection of buffers of 3D data and specifications for how to render it.  The following code creates a mesh, loads vertex and index information into buffers, and draws the mesh to the screen:


      {% highlight javascript%}
      var mesh;

      app.onInit(){
           mesh = new GFX.Mesh();
           var vertices = [/*...coordinates...*/]; 
           var indices = [/*...index into coordinates...*/];
           mesh.load(vertices,indices);
      }

      app.onRender(){
            
            var scene = this.scene;

            scene.begin();
            scene.draw(mesh);
            scene.end();
      }
      {% endhighlight %}

For now, one built-in Mesh is already included, `GFX.Mesh.Frame`, which can be used:
      
      var mesh; 
      app.onInit(){
            mesh = GFX.Mesh.MakeFrame();
      }

This creates the Mesh if it does not exist already, and returns a fresh copy if it does.

#### Methods:

* `.load(vertices,indices)`: Buffers Vertex and Index Data to the GPU   
      - `vertices` is a list of 3D Vertex Coordinates.  
      - `indices` is a list of integer indices into the vertex list.   
      - If a list of indices is passed in then `useElements` is set to true.
* `.loadVertices(vertices, hint)`: Buffers Vertex Data only, with optional hint   
      - `hint` is an optional value (`GL.STATIC_DRAW`, `GL.STREAM_DRAW`, or `GL.DYNAMIC_DRAW`)
* `.loadIndices(vertices, hint)`: Buffers Index Data only, with optional hint   
      - `hint` is an optional value (`GL.STATIC_DRAW`, `GL.STREAM_DRAW`, or `GL.DYNAMIC_DRAW`)
* `.loadUV(texCoords,hint)`: Buffers Texture Coordinate Data to the GPU  
      - `texCoords` is a list of 2D Texture Coordinates  
      - `hint` is an optional value (`GL.STATIC_DRAW`, `GL.STREAM_DRAW`, or `GL.DYNAMIC_DRAW`)
      - Sets `.useUV` to true.
* `.loadColor(colors,hint)`: Buffers Color Data to the GPU  
      - `colors` is a list of 3D Color values  
      - `hint` is an optional value (`GL.STATIC_DRAW`, `GL.STREAM_DRAW`, or `GL.DYNAMIC_DRAW`)
      - Sets `.useColor` to true;

### Members

* `.useElements`: A boolean value specifying whether to call `GL.DrawElements` or `GL.DrawArrays`.  If set to true, then when the mesh is drawn by [`scene.draw(mesh)`](#scene.draw), the `.indexBuffer` is bound with `GL.bindBuffer` and then used to specify the order in which the vertices are drawn with `GL.drawElements`. 
* `.useUV`: A boolean value specifying whether to enable uv mapping.
      - If set to true, the "uv" attribute on the shader is enabled during rendering with `GL.enableVertexAttribArray`, the mesh's`.texBuffer` is bound with `GL.bindBuffer`, and the attribute and buffer are bound with `GL.vertexAttributePointer`.
* `.useColor`: A boolean value specifying whether to enable the "color" attribute on the shader.
      - If set to true, the "color" attribute on the shader is enabled during rendering with `GL.enableVertexAttribArray`, the mesh's`.colorBuffer` is bound with `GL.bindBuffer`, and the attribute and buffer are bound with `GL.vertexAttributePointer`. 
* `.vertexBuffer`: A buffer of 3D Vector data.
* `.indexBuffer`: A buffer of index data.
* `.texBuffer`: A buffer of UV data.
* `.colorBuffer`: A buffer of Color data.


## <a name="camera"> GFX.Camera </a>

Contains a frame of reference for calculating a view matrix, and some parameters for calculating a projection matrix.

[GFX.Scene](#scene) has a Camera.

The following code causes the scene's camera to orbit around the origin, while always facing it.

      {% highlight javascript%}
      app.onRender(){
            
            var scene = this.scene;
            var t = scene.time;
            scene.camera.frame.position.set( 5 * Math.sin(t), 0, 5* Math.cos(t));
            scene.camera.setTarget( new GFX.Vector(0,0,0));
            scene.begin();
                  scene.draw(mesh);
            scene.end();
      }
      {% endhighlight %}

### Methods
* <a name="camera.setTarget">'.setTarget(v)'</a>: Sets camera orientation so that it looks at `v`.

### Members

* `.frame`: A [GFX.Frame](#frame) for position and orientation data.  Used when calculating the view matrix in [`scene.begin()`](#scene.begin).  Note that the camera looks along its negative z axis.
* `.fovy`: The Field-of-View in degrees, used for calculating the Projection matrix.
* `.focalLength`: Parallax merge point (used in 3D Stereoscopic rendering).
* `.eyeSep`: Eye Separation (used in 3D Stereoscopic rendering).

## <a name="frame"> GFX.Frame </a>

A frame of reference with `.position`, `.orientation`, and `.size` member variables and `.translate()`, `.rotate()`, and `.scale()` methods to transform those variables.

[GFX.Mesh](#mesh) has a frame.  
[GFX.Camera](#camera) has a frame.  
[GFX.Scene](#scene) has a frame.  

The following code would animate your mesh by moving it, rotating it, and scaling it repeatedly.  

            {% highlight javascript %}
            app.onRender(){
                  var scene = this.scene;
                  scene.begin();
                        mesh.frame.translate(/*...dx,dy,dz...*/);
                        mesh.frame.rotate(/*...dt,x,y,z...*/)
                        mesh.frame.scale(/*...dsx,dsy,dsz...*/)
                        scene.draw(mesh);
                  scene.end();
            }    
            {% endhighlight %}


For frames, it is not important in which order these transformations are written in your code: the frame's transformation is **always** converted into a matrix in TRS order:
      
$$A_{frame} = A_{position} * A_{orientation} * A_{scale}$$

For manipulating imagery with order-dependent coordinate system transformations, see the [GFX.MatrixStack](#stack) of [GFX.Scene](#scene).

### Features

The `.orientation` of Frames can be specified by setting it directly using the methods from [GFX.Quaternion](#quaternion), or by using helper functions like `setTargetZ` which can lock a frame's axis onto a target.

Frames can be interpolated between by using the static method [`GFX.Frame.FromTo`](#frame.fromto) which takes two Frames as parameters, and a scalar amount by which to interpolate between them.

Frames can be composed together with [`.mult(f)`](#frame.mult), to create new Frames that are a composition of the two.

#### Methods

* <a name="frame.matrix">`.matrix()`</a>: Calculates a Translation-Rotation-Scale matrix.
* <a name="frame.translate">`.translate(x,y,z)`</a>: Moves the `.position` vector.
* <a name="frame.rotate">`.rotate(t,x,y,z)`</a>: Spins the `.orientation` quaternion by `t` radians around the global `x,y,z` axis.
* <a name="frame.scale">`.scale(x,y,z)`</a>: Dilates the `.size` vector by `x,y,z`.
* `.x()`: Get the local x axis [GFX.Vector](#vector).
* `.y()`: Get the local y axis [GFX.Vector](#vector).
* `.z()`: Returns the local z axis [GFX.Vector](#vector).
* `.rotateX(t)`: Rotate `t` radians about the local x axis.
* `.rotateY(t)`: Rotate `t` radians about the local y axis.
* `.rotateZ(t)`: Rotate `t` radians about the local z axis.
* `.setTargetX(v)`: Set orientation so that local x axis points towards [GFX.Vector](#vector) v. 
* `.setTargetY(v)`: Set orientation so that local y axis points towards [GFX.Vector](#vector) v.
* `.setTargetZ(v)`: Set orientation so that local z axis points towards [GFX.Vector](#vector) v.
* `.setTarget(v)`: Set orientation so that local z axis points towards [GFX.Vector](#vector) v while keeping local y axis as close to vertical as possible.
* <a name="frame.mult">`.mult(relFrame)`</a>: Returns a new Frame by composing this one with a transformation relative to it.

#### Static Methods
* <a name="frame.fromto">`GFX.Frame.FromTo(fa,fb, t)`</a>: Returns a Frame whose position, orientation, and size is an interpolated value between `fa` and `fb` by amount `t`.

#### Members

* <a name ="frame.position">`.position`</a>: A [GFX.Vector](#vector) encoding x,y,z coordinate position in the world.
* <a name ="frame.orientation">`.orientation`</a>: A [GFX.Quaternion](#quaternion) encoding the orientation.
* <a name ="frame.size">`.size`</a>: A [GFX.Vector](#vector) encoding the scale in each direction.



## <a name="vector">GFX.Vector</a>

A 3D Vector.

OpenGL is right-handed, so this means:

The positive z axis points towards you.  
The positive y axis points up.  
The positive x axis points right.  

Vectors can be rotated using the `.apply(v)` method of [GFX.Quaternion](#quaternion)

      {% highlight javascript %}
      var v = GFX.Vector(1.2,4.7,3.2);
      var q = GFX.Quaternion.Rotation(Math.PI/2,0,1,0);
      var vp = q.apply(v);
      {% endhighlight %}

#### Methods

* `.set(x,y,z)`: set values
* `.add(v)`: Return a new Vector by summing of coordinate values with Vector `v`
* `.sub(v)`: Return a new Vector by subtracting Vector `v`.
* `.mult(s)`: Return a new Vector by multiplying each coordinate value by `s`.
* `.divide(s)`: Return a new Vector by dividing each coordinate value by `s`.
* `.dot(v)`: Return the dot product with `v`.
* `.cross(v)`: Return the cross product with `v`.
* `.norm()`: Return the length. 
* `.unit()`: Return the a new normalized vector.
* `.neg()`: Return negative vector.

#### Members
* `.x`: Coordinate along x axis;
* `.y`: Coordinate along y axis;
* `.z`: Coordinate along z axis;


## <a name="matrix">GFX.Matrix</a>

A 4x4 Matrix.  Matrices in GFX are Row-Major, and so are transposed when sending values to the shader with `shader.setUniformMatrix`.

#### Methods
* `.mult(m)`: Returns new Matrix by multiplication with matrix m.
* `.multVec(v)`: Returns a new 4D Vector by multiplying with v.
* `.transpose()`: Returns a new Matrix that by transposition.
* `.inverse()`: Inverse of Matrix
* `.det()`: Determinant of Matrix

#### Static Methods
* `GFX.Matrix.identity()`: Identity
* `GFX.Matrix.translation(x,y,z)`: Translation by `x,y,z`
* `GFX.Matrix.rotation(angle,x,y,z)`: Rotation by `angle` radians about axis `x,y,z`.
* `GFX.Matrix.scale(x,y,z)`: Scale by `x,y,z`.
* `GFX.Matrix.perspective(fovy, ratio, near, far)`: Generate Projection from Symmetrical Frustum.
* `GFX.Matrix.frustum(l,r,t,b,near,far)`: Generate Projection from General Frustum.
* `GFX.Matrix.lookAt(eye,target,up)`: Generate View Matrix.

#### Members

* `.val`: An array of 16 floating point numbers.

## <a name="matrix">GFX.Matrix3</a>

A 3x3 Matrix.  Matrices in GFX are Row-Major, and so are transposed when sending values to the shader with `shader.setUniformMatrix3`.  3x3 matrices are only used for Normal matrices, and so multiplication methods are not provided (use GFX.Matrix instead).

#### Methods
* `.inverse()`: Inverse of Matrix
* `.det()`: Determinant of Matrix

#### Members

* `.val`: An array of 16 floating point numbers.



## <a name = "quaternion">GFX.Quaternion</a>

A Quaternion represents a rotation in 3D.  It can be used to transform a [GFX.Vector](#vector) and can be multiplied with other quaternions to compose rotations.  The following code creates a quaternion that rotates a vector 90 degrees around the y axis:

      {% highlight javascript %}
      var v = GFX.Vector(1,0,0);
      var q = GFX.Quaternion.Rotation(Math.PI/2,0,1,0);
      var tv = q.apply(v);
      {% endhighlight %}
   
Quaternions can be created by specifying:

* An angle and an axis (`GFX.Quaternion.AxisAngle`, `GFX.Quaternion.setAxisAngle`, `GFX.Quaternion.Rotation`, `GFX.Quaternion.setRotation`)
* Euler angles (`GFX.Quaternion.Euler`, `GFX.Quaternion.setEuler`)
* a relative transformation from one vector to another (`GFX.Quaternion.Relative, `GFX.Quaternion.setRelative`)
* a relative transformation from one quaternion to another (`GFX.Quaternion.Slerp`, `GFX.Quaternion.setSlerp`)
* a z direction at and an [optional] y target direction vector (`GFX.Quaternion.setForwardUp`, `GFX.Quaternion.setForwardUp`)

A Quaternion is used to represent the [`.orientation`](#frame.orientation) of a [GFX.Frame](#frame).
It's `w,x,y,z` elements should not be set directly, but rather with methods like `.setAxisAngle` and `.setEuler`.


      {% highlight javascript %}
      // set from euler angles
      frame.orientation.setEuler(yaw,pitch,roll);
      // set from angle and axis
      frame.orientation.setRotation(t,x,y,z);
      // set from relative transformation
      frame.orientation.setRelative(va,vb,t);
      {% endhighlight %}

 The following code interpolates an orientation in 3D: 

      {% highlight javascript %}
      for (var i=0; i < 10; ++i){
            var t = i/10;
            var q = GFX.Quaternion.Slerp(qa,qb,t);
            frame.orientation = q;
      }
      {% endhighlight %}


#### Methods 

* `.setAxisAngle(v,t)`: Returns a rotation `t` radians around axis [GFX.Vector](#vector) `v`
* `.setRotation(t,x,y,z)`: Returns a rotation in `t` radians around axis `x,y,z`:
* `.setEuler(yaw,pitch,roll)`: Returns a rotation in Euler angles.
* `.setRelative(va,vb,t)`: Returns a rotation that takes vector `va` to `vb`, with `t` an amount from (0-1).
* `.apply(v)`: Returns a transformed position of [GFX.Vector](#vector) `v`. 
* `.mult(q)`: Returns a new Quaternion encoding a transformation by `q`, followed by a transformation by this.
* `.matrix()`: Returns a 4x4 [GFX.Matrix](#matrix) encoding of the Quaternion.  Used internally to calculate model matrices.
* `.scalarMult(s)`: Returns a new Quaternion multiplied by a scalar value `s`. Used internally to normalize quaternions.
* `.add(q)`: Returns a new Quaternion by summing the values of this and `q`.  Used internallly in shorthand versions of `.Slerp()`;

#### Static Methods

* `GFX.Quaternion.Slerp(qa,qb,t)`: A rotation of `qa` to `qb`, with `t` an amount from (0-1).
* `GFX.Quaternion.AxisAngle(v,t)`:  A rotation of  `t` radians around axis [GFX.Vector](#vector) `v`.
* `GFX.Quaternion.Rotation(t,x,y,z)`: A rotation `t` radians around axis `x,y,z`.
* `GFX.Quaternion.Euler(yaw,pitch,roll)`: A rotation in Euler angles.


Note on Euler angles: Here, we consider "y" to be up/down and "z" to be forward/back (in some physics references this is the opposite).
      -`yaw`: y axis rotation ("heading")
      -`pitch`: x axis rotation ("attitude")
      -`roll`: z axis rotation ("bank")

## <a name="shader">GFX.Shader</a>

Creates, Loads, compiles, attaches, links and binds vertex and fragment shader programs.

      var shader = new GFX.Shader();
      shader.program(vertCode,fragCode);

#### Methods

* `.program(vert,frag)`: Create a program from shader source code.
* `.create()`: Creates a new program and new vertex and fragment shaders.  
* `.load(vert,frag)`: Loads source text into vertex and fragment shaders.  
* `.compile()`: Compiles vertex and fragment shaders with and checks for errors.  
* `.checkCompilation()`: Checks for error when compiling.  
* `.link()`: Attach vertex and fragment shaders to program, links program, and check for linking errors.  
* `.checkLinking()`: Checks for error when linking.  
* `.setUniformMatrix(uname, m)`: Set uniform 4x4 matrix `uname` to float array `m`.  
* `.setUniformFloat(uname, f)`: Set uniform float `uname` to scalar value `f`.  
* `.getAttribute(aname)`: Get location id of attribute named `aname`.
* `.enableAttribute(aname)`: Enable attribute named `aname`.
* `.pointAttribute(aname, n)`: Point `n`-dimensional attribute `aname` to currently bound buffer.
* `.printActiveAttributes()`: Print out all active attributes to the javascript console.

## <a name="buffer">GFX.Buffer</a>

Creates, allocates, and loads mesh data (vertex coordinates, indices, uv coordinates, colors) onto the GPU.

Typically accessed via [GFX.Mesh](#mesh) which has a bunch of Buffers.


#### Constructor
      
Creates and binds a new buffer

      var buffer = new GFX.Buffer(type)

with `type` either `GL.ARRAY_BUFFER` (default) or `GL.ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER` or unspecified (in which case default is used).

#### Methods
* `.create()`: Create a new buffer.
* `.bind()`: Bind the buffer.
* `.alloc(size,hint)`: Allocate memory with `size` in bytes and `hint`.  
      - `hint` is either GL.STATIC_DRAW, GL.STREAM_DRAW or GL.DYNAMIC_DRAW.
* `.data(d,offset)`: Sends data `d` to buffer's `offset` position (default is 0).
* `.load(data, hint)`: binds, allocates, and sends `data` over to buffer.
* `.drawElements(mode,num)`: Draws coordinate data in currently bound array buffer by using indices in currently bound element array buffer.  `mode` is either GL.LINES, GL.TRIANGLES, etc. `num` is an optional parameter specifying the number of elements in the index buffer (if unspecified, uses num set during data loading)
* `.drawArrays(mode,num)`: Draws coordinate data in currently bound array buffer. `mode` is either GL.LINES, GL.TRIANGLES, etc. `num` is an optional parameter specifying the number of elements in the array buffer (if unspecified, uses the number set during data loading)

#### Members
* `.num`: Length of buffer (set during `data()` load)
* `.type`: `GL.ARRAY_BUFFER` or `GL.ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER`




